so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
don't get away with anything and so you
might think you can bend the fabric of
reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest ethical Spirit to
which we're beholden is presented
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
for a long time on the self-esteem front
there was this idea that positive
affirmations for children were the way
to self-esteem all that
false praise that devaluation of the
currency of reward that over
generalization of of uh insistence upon
your child's singular wonderfulness at
the expense of other people it didn't
improve self-esteem what it did was
inflate narcissism and so all this idiot
insistence on self-esteem through
continual affirmation
you produce this increase in
self-centered narcissism and you make
kids more isolated and miserable and
lonely than they would have otherwise
had to be when I worked with parents it
was constantly you know a child would
come home and say somebody kicked me in
the playground and the first question
from the parent was not so what did you
do about it or what happened but and how
did that make you feel and and what it
does is it gives power to feelings above
actions and so you you get a child who
then the child stops and thinks well how
did I feel about it and it's usually you
know sad or angry or happy you know this
sort of very limited range of feeling
words if we bring that back every time
to the child's feelings and the child is
growing up thinking my feelings are the
most important thing
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone watching or listening on
YouTube or Associated podcaster on The
Daily wear plus platform
I have the privilege today of speaking
to Stephanie Davies awry she is a
decorated author
and the founder as well as the Director
of transgender Trend a uk-based
organization that has been perpetually
Under Fire by leftist activists simply
for advocating for evidence-based health
care when it comes to gender dysphoric
children she's also the author of
communicating with kids book published
in 2015 based on her background training
teachers and providing parental support
Davies awry is also notable for being an
intervener in the high court during the
landmark case Bell versus Tavistock
which concluded that persons under 18
cannot consent to puberty blockers so
Stephanie I was reading your book today
2015 book communicating with children
and I thought maybe I could
playfully put you on the spot in my
First Book 12 rules for life I my first
popular book I have a chapter entitled
don't let your children do anything that
makes you dislike them and so what I
thought I'd ask you given uh given that
you wrote this book detailing out
different means of communicating with
children developing a philosophy of
communication with children I'm kind of
wondering what you think of that rule
how does that strike you don't let your
children do anything that makes you
dislike them I love that you started
with that because that's the bit in your
book which I've read
um that jumped out as me at me because
that's what I say to parents you know
you of course you love your children to
bits you die for them but do you like
them because that's really important in
day-to-day living but the other thing I
say is that it's not only important that
you like your own kids but the other
parents do and other people outside
because of the otherwise your kids are
going to have a really hard time and
you're not going to be doing them a
favor if you bring them up to be
unpopular with other kids parents
because they're gonna they're gonna
depend on them
so okay so so let me outline a few ideas
for you and you tell me criticize away
or agree as you see fit so
I think we know there's a large
literature indicating that it's better
for for children to have two parents and
I think the reason for that this is my
reasoning for it there's a variety of
reasons obviously raising children and
working is very difficult so being able
to split the labor is a way of perhaps
not being entirely exhausted when you
have small children but I think there's
something else going on too which is
more it's it's Akin in some sense to the
reason that there's sexual
differentiation at a biological level so
there's sexual differentiation because
it's useful to bring together two
disparate creatures to produce a new
variant but I also think it's true on
the personality front so if you have a
nicely organized marriage you know
you're going to have your bits of
insanity and your partner is going to
have their bits of insanity but if you
can form a joint Union
then I believe you can produce something
approximating one sane person
and so and that person is saying that
joint person is saying not so much
because they're saying psychologically
but because they're an analog of the
broader social world
so and I'm making I'm saying that for a
specific reason so then the theory would
be if your children are acting in a way
that both of you find displeasing if
you're honest
then the probability that other people
will find that displeasing is extremely
high because you at least love your
children whereas other people you know
they might be willing to give them a
chance but they're not going to die for
them and so
if you accept the additional hypothesis
that the primary role of a parent is to
prepare their children for for what
would you say welcome acceptance into
the broader social world then you have a
moral obligation to guide your children
in some sense in accordance with your
own joint feelings if if the two of you
find your child's behavior unacceptable
you're morally obligated to let the
child know because that is not going to
translate well to other children to
other children's parents to teachers to
any situations in public and then your
child's going to have a miserable time
of it and I I think the research
literature indicates that very clearly
yeah and I think you know you're right
in the sense that the children need the
male and the female the masculine the
feminine but that can be achieved in
other ways I've worked with all kinds of
families so uh my work is about
um make creating the optimum situation
for families no matter what the whether
they're married or or what kind of
family situation they're in so I would
agree and particularly that children
need strong role models of the opposite
sex and the same sex so you know if it's
a single parent family for example to
find those role models that are close
family members because I've you know all
very good friends of the family that it
has to be a close relationship I mean
teachers as well but there are other
adults who can fill that Gap and and
that is that I think is very important
that that Gap is filled if the family
isn't that a male female unit of of
marriage that is the traditional unit
right because the children have to learn
okay so there's two elements there so
you bring uh mother and a father
together and you the child gets the
benefit of their joint personality right
the fact that they've got two people to
hit against and hopefully that makes one
sane person but the socialization rules
for being feminine and the socialization
rules for being masculine aren't
identical and so that's part of the
reason why it's necessary to have those
contrary
contracexual Role Models at hand and at
hand does mean something like making a
relationship with because the other
thing we know about children is though
they can establish multiple deep
relationships with people so they can
actually stand multiple caregivers but
they don't really like a lot of change
in their caregivers they don't like
relationships once they're established
to be to be decimated let's say well
neither do adults but it's even more the
case for children and so yeah it and
it's harder for a single parent family
for someone who's running a single
parent family to fill that well fill
that diversity of personality to solve
that problem but also to provide the
contracexual uh role model so I I agree
I mean I think that consistency is
really important for children and it's
fractured in so many ways now in society
because if people move around more
people don't tend to stay in
um those units or those extended family
groups in one area so we have more and
more more and more challenges today in
bringing up children and parents face
well I'm sure I'm sure you're aware
um other challenges in terms of
um online life the internet
um influences from outside so yes that
kind to try and create that consistency
for children in their relationships in
their close family relationships I think
is one of the things that's very
important
um having said that I mean you know
there are all sorts of situations that
are not Optimum for children and it's it
children are robust so you know you can
look at in our Western Society for
example to remember the fact that our
children are you know generally very
privileged
um compared to other parts of the world
and so we can get I think too concerned
about what the
um negative aspects of our society are
and forget the fact that children are
generally robust they are programmed to
survive and to get on
um and so we shouldn't be too careful or
too worried about the kind of
disadvantages they face in in uh you
know sort of a western Society where
they have many advantages
Black Rifle coffee company is helping
you knock out your holiday shopping with
a ton of awesome new products this year
shop the best Brewing gear thermosis
mugs and apparel designed for folks who
love country and coffee Black Rifle
sources the most exotic roast from
around the globe all coffee is roasted
here in the U.S by veteran-led teams of
coffee experts stuff your Christmas
stockings with the latest roasts from
America's coffee for 10 off with the
code Jordan better yet sign your Secret
Santa up for a coffee Club subscription
imagine the joy of a pre-scheduled
coffee delivery your favorite roast when
you need the most it's the gift that
keeps on giving Black Rifle coffee
company is veteran founded and operated
they take pride in serving coffee and
culture to people who love America every
purchase you make with Black Rifle helps
support veteran and first responder
causes go to blackriflecoffee.com and
use promo code Jordan for 10 off coffee
Coffee Gear apparel and when you sign up
for a new coffee Club subscription
that's black riflecoffee.com with promo
code Jordan for 10 off Black Rifle
coffee supporting veterans and America's
coffee
[Music]
yes well it's you you talk about the
fact that parents now exist and what you
described as a post-freudian world and
so there was this idea based on a I
would say an oversimplified reading of
Freud that all psychological problems
that adults suffer from are a
consequence of trauma often associated
with poor parenting in childhood and
first of all no because there's lots of
reasons to have psychological distress
as an adult that have nothing to do with
your parents I mean as the existential
psychotherapists pointed out very
clearly in the 50s
just the catastrophes associated with
being alive are sufficient to cause
people a substantial amount of
depression and anxiety and hopelessness
so it doesn't have to be all bad
parenting and secondly the the extremes
of terrible parenting that Freud noted
aren't really
I wouldn't say they're uncommon but
they're not typical so Freud was
particularly concerned with edible
parenting and that would be well I
suppose the modern equivalent of that is
something like helicopter parenting is
the potential Damage Done by someone who
cares so much for their children that
they're completely unable to give them
any autonomy whatsoever but I think it's
useful for parents to know that as you
just pointed out the children are quite
robust and they can adapt to a variety
of circumstances and also that what
you're trying to do with your children
is actually have a relationship with
them and one of the things that
characterizes robust Human Relationships
is that they can actually stay intact
across a wide variety of emotional
scenarios you know sometimes people in
my clients used to wonder for example if
they could have they should ever fight
in front of their children and my
response to that always was
it's not whether or not you fight
it's whether or not you reconcile and so
what you want to do is model for your
children the fact that there's going to
be conflict about very important and
difficult issues some of those
interpersonal but some of them just
practical that that conflict is actually
going to produce a fair bit of emotion
some of which might be negative and even
rather intense but
that those things can be negotiated
through and the relationship can come
back together we know for example even
by studying our close primate relatives
that chimpanzees that the males for
example are extremely fractious in their
interpersonal interactions but they're
also ex the sophisticated ones are also
extremely good at reconciling and
peacemaking
and so while the point of all this is
that your children are perfectly capable
of adapting to a wide range of emotional
events positive and negative and what
you want to help them understand is that
the relationship you have with them and
with each other if you're married is of
the sort that's going to be able to
withstand the full range of emotional
expression without breaking apart and so
they don't have to worry about them
being fragile and you don't have to
worry in some sense even about making
mistakes with them as long as you're
doing that in the same way you would do
that with someone with whom you really
want to maintain a long-term
relationship
it's a very rare married couple who
don't fight who don't ever fight and
don't ever and one of the things that I
think is important as you say that
children may see you fight and and of
course by that I don't mean you know
hugely aggressive throwing things or
beating your partner up
um but the normal kind of arguments and
fights and that that that a couple would
get into if the children observe that
then I think you're right that it's
important that they also see the making
up
um but they also learn that you're not
perfect that conflict exists and that
people resolve it and that it doesn't
destroy you so I think that is really
important right the other thing is about
the you know anger and conflict and
argument is is as you say just a normal
part of life so if you try and I this is
what I see the pressure on
um parents and particularly mothers to
be nice all the time to be be kind and
nice and and never do anything in front
of the children and
you create a kind of false sort of a
family and some of the some of the
families I know that I think have the
most healthy relationships the ones that
shout at each other quite a lot
um you know they're quite volatile in
the way that they do so but they're very
honest and they make up and they're very
very close and loving families so you
can't you know you get and then and then
there are other families that try or the
parents tried desperately hard to always
present a you know a loving and kind and
nice front and everything's false
everything's there everything's under
the surface then and that I think is
very very confusing and anxiety
provoking in children when you can feel
the underground or undercurrence as
children can but nobody's saying
anything out loud
right well that's part of that extended
edible complex in some sense is that the
issue is I mean it's perfectly
reasonable for people to work towards
having peace in their household but
peace is actually extremely difficult to
establish and maintain
because peace means that both of you
agree
and also peace means that there's
nothing unbelievably complicated facing
you at the moment about which you have
no idea why and you have no idea how to
approach it you know if you have a sick
child for example then and you're trying
to sort through how to discipline a
child like that let's say or what
medical Pathway to walk down
there's no way you can avoid having
conflict if you're going to think about
it because it's a very serious issue and
you have to think about it seriously and
that means you have to discuss it and if
you have a different Viewpoint that
discussion can get quite heated
but there's no difference between that
and thinking that heated discussion and
unless you sort through say the
complexities on the disciplinary and the
medical treatment front you actually
don't have peace
right you just have a problem now what
happens in the families that insist upon
presenting this you might say
gingerbread house world of false peace
to their children is that they're
pretending constantly that every problem
is solved and peace actually Reigns but
they're telling the children often
through non-verbal behavior that any
conflict whatsoever is so disruptive and
so intolerable that we have to pretend
all the time that no conflict whatsoever
exists and so all that does is turn
children into creatures that are
terrified of their own negative emotions
so they feel that if the if peace is so
necessary
and psyche's so fragile but no emotion
whatsoever is in allowed on the negative
side then any problem must be of
terrifying proportions and only
something to avoid and that's definitely
that's definitely a catastrophe for
children especially because they they
can especially when they're little they
can be quite volatile right I mean if
they're tired or hungry or hot or cold
and they get volatile they get upset and
then if they're feeling that they're
breaking the eggshells underneath the
carpet or rattling the skeletons in the
closet that's just not good for them at
all
yeah it teaches children to be afraid of
conflict and disagreement and argument
and from those are parts of a healthy
relationship you you disagree and you
um I I think that
it when it comes to discipline
disciplining the children that's an
issue that is the adult's job and it
shouldn't be done in front of the
children that I mean it helps if parents
share the same values but often there is
a difference between I mean
discipline and attitude discipline
um this is so so common that one parent
is more authoritarian and the other
parent is more liberal and wants to to
let the children get away with things
more and the other one wants really
tough discipline and that's so so common
to get to a greater or lesser extent so
those sorts of issues really need to be
talked about and sorted out by the
parents it's not the child's job to join
in with
um methods of his or her own discipline
that is the parents job it's the adult's
job and a child isn't you know and then
the parents should be able to reach some
agreement or compromise and and then you
know see it but that shouldn't be part
of the child's job it's not the child's
job to you know yeah well you talked
about two camps of discipline Camp a and
Camp B Camp a
associated with order let's say and
integration into the social world and
can't be Associated more let's say with
chaos and individuation and that's kind
of a conservative liberal split there
too and I suppose that does reflect the
fact that children have two problems to
solve as they mature broadly speaking
one is well how do I get along with my
parents and my siblings and my friends
and my teachers the whole social world
how do I fit in so that's problem number
one so that means how do I conduct
myself so that people appreciate having
me around and I'm a valued social member
and the second problem is well how do I
stand on my own two feet and also become
a reliable source of creative
individuality and some ability to push
back against the mindlessness of the
group and that is an optimization
problem it's very complex and there's no
simple answer to that partly because it
depends on the situation and it depends
on the child and so parents definitely
have to negotiate that out I found with
my wife I probably was
I'd probably make the first disciplinary
move in like 75 percent of the cases
maybe 60 percent of the cases in our
marriage I don't think that's that
uncommon because men are more likely to
intervene by and large than women are
because they're less agreeable but I
also found you know most of the time
although my wife and I were pretty much
on the same page with our kids if I just
shut the hell up for 15 seconds when the
kids were misbehaving
she would respond and it was so
interesting because her threshold for
tolerating misbehavior was not very much
different than mine it was literally
say on average 15 seconds but because it
was
reliably she was reliably somewhat more
patient that did mean that in some
circumstances the bulk of the initial
disciplinary moves fell to me so that's
another thing that's interesting for
that might be interesting for people to
know too you might be closer than you
think on the disciplinary fronts just
one person's little quicker on the draw
than the other and so it's about well
sorry please go ahead it's just it's
back to sharing values isn't it if
you've got essentially the same values
about how you want to bring your child
up and how how your how you want your
child to be in the world what you what
your goals are for the way you raise a
child then you can probably
work those things out as adults together
and yeah it's not as well so we could we
we could lay out some of those
principles and I think that would be
useful for people who are watching so
let's take that campaign Camp B we'll
start with Camp a and that would be the
more conservative side look it's really
important that your children are popular
and and welcome and that doesn't mean
because they've sold their soul to the
group it means because they can play
fair and they're productive and generous
and they know how to take turns and they
don't whine too much when they lose and
they don't Triumph too annoyingly when
they win and they're good at reciprocity
they're good play partners and that's
really crucially important to kids the
literature on the development of
criminal Behavior anti-social behavior
in children shows quite clearly that
there's a subset of kids who are quite
aggressive at the age of two most of
them are boys most of them get
socialized by the time they're four
but some of them don't and the ones that
don't
start out there their sad little social
lives as social Rejects and what happens
is they fall farther and farther behind
because the other kids start to play
together because they can stand each
other they they start to develop
friendships and within those friendships
they scaffold their social growth and so
what that means is that if your child is
unlikable at four maybe because you
didn't help socialize them sufficiently
between you and your wife then other
children will reject them and then
they're really in trouble and the
literature I was familiar with indicated
that
if your child doesn't make a smooth
entry into the social World somewhere
between the ages of three and five
there's almost nothing that can be done
after that to remediate that it's such a
serious problem and so one thing that
parents could be aiming at is well this
is why you don't let child your children
do anything that makes you dislike them
because you want other people to welcome
them so you need they need to be able to
modulate their behavior in a socially
acceptable way so that's on the
conservative side on the liberal side
you'd say well you don't want your child
just to be
like a clone of the group you want them
to have some individuality and some
autonomy and so you might have to argue
between you about what the balance is
between those two things in relationship
to your particular child because it
needs to be particularized but um those
are good aims an autonomous child who
knows how to play well with others
that's a pretty good deal for the child
and for the world and for you as parents
yeah and this is why when I research
parent books parenting advice books and
and I think the parenting advice
industry has doesn't get enough scrutiny
actually I I don't I'm not big I'm not a
big fan of parenting books
um but they tended to be either the kind
of quite authoritarian or the quite
liberal and you know and I in in my book
I point out that actually there are good
things about both there are necessary
things about both as individuation and
integration and you know both of those
things have and so you take the bits
from each model and you put them
together because both of those are
important and some of those
um some of the advice in the more
authoritarian books is good some of it I
don't think is is good at all uh and the
same with the other way yes it's
important that children are individuals
it's important that we listen to
Children more than we use than we used
to
but what I've seen is it's the liberal
parenting side that has
um come into ascendancy over the last
two decades and and that runs right
across the
um social spectrum of parents you get
working class parents middle class
parents are very liberal and I I think
there's
um and and I think most of the books are
on that side and that creates a huge
imbalance in sort of hoping that your
child will become a fully rounded human
being who feels good about themselves
but also
um fits into society but doesn't become
a sheep or a cog in the world as you say
um so I I think we have we have this
huge imbalance for children that that
doesn't make them happy
and that what one of the things that I
think is important if you want that sort
of freedom for your your child that that
you create a structure and you cannot
really have freedom without structure
because that's chaos and that's
terrifying for children and
um but but I think the whole focus is on
this idea that children are born whole
with a fully formed self
um that it's the parents job to
facilitate expression of that self
and I think this okay so let's let's
let's dig into that a little bit so you
were concerned in in these statements
about the Tilt towards a more liberal
parenting so first thing I might comment
about that is that
being extremely liberal can also be a
perfectly valid excuse for neglect
because it actually takes real detailed
attention to your children's Behavior to
help them walk the appropriate social
path
and if you're not attending you let them
get away with everything you can justify
that by saying well what I'm doing is
trying to individuate my child I don't
want to put any social restrictions on
them because that's all hemming in their
natural pre-form perfect creativity and
so and then you give yourself an easy
out and that's that's not helpful hardly
and that's partly also being driven by
this idiot insistence that self-esteem
is only internal and it's only
psychological and that's an unbelievably
pathological model of self-esteem and I
would thank the social psychologists for
that mostly because
a huge amount of what your child would
experience let's say as self-esteem
which is actually by the way technically
control of negative emotion isn't the
consequence of the individuated nature
of their psyche it's a consequence of
the fact that other people can stand
having them around without being mean
and rejecting all the time so if you
have a child who knows how to play by
the age of three
let's say and can share and isn't too
whiny and isn't too triumphant and can
reciprocate
then you can send them off to daycare
you can send them off to
pre-kindergarten and they'll make
friends and then when they go to school
they have friends and the teachers like
them and so they aren't suffering from
the kind of negative emotion that people
would confuse with low self-esteem but
it's not because
particularly because they're
individuated or well integrated
intra-psychically it's because their
behavior is well regulated socially and
so they integrate well into the
community and so other people don't
exclude and torture them and so
it we really do have a warped and
rusoian view of the way the children
develop right is they're perfect in and
of themselves except insofar as parents
impose pathological parents in society
impose pathological restrictions on them
and it's as you said you pointed out
another thing which is
don't be confused in Freedom and chaos
like if you give your children cartilage
all that means is that their impulsive
and anxious it does not mean they're
free an optimally free child is actually
playing a structured game
now we know games are fun but we also
know games run by principals they run by
rules the rules aren't exactly there to
constrain and hand in like you'd think
if you were resilient the rules are
actually preconditioned for a very
complex sort of freedom and the basic
rules of social interaction like
reciprocity and not whining too much
when you lose and not being too
triumphant when you win those are the
basic rules of social interaction and
they actually facilitate Freedom rather
than being antithetical to it
men is it time to stop mindless
scrolling time to finally gain that
higher quality of life you know you're
missing out on if this sounds familiar
then on January 9th join thousands of
men all over the world to embark on a
90-day journey together in search of a
better life
it's called Exodus 90 and it was built
to help men enjoy the freedom of
becoming who they were truly made to be
Exodus 90 guides you in removing the
attachments that are holding you back
from a better life and it actually works
independent research shows that Exodus
90 men report considerable shifts after
the first 90 days including stronger
satisfaction rates in their marriages
more meaningful prayer lives and
dramatic decreases in time spent on
their phones
for the past seven years Exodus has
helped more than 60 thousand men build a
road map for living with virtue in a
culture that offers far too many paths
to self-destruction
is it time for your Exodus we start
January 9th find resources to prepare
for Exodus at exodus90.com Jordan that's
exodus90.com Jordan
hey it's Freedom
um total freedom without boundaries is
terrifying absolutely terrifying it is
chaos and for for a child
that you know that is terrifying but you
all the child is always always
pushing for those boundaries that the
pair that they expect and I think
children are born absolutely expecting
the adult to know what they're doing to
to
um and and to guide them and and so they
push to find out where that boundary is
and that's the the little child's job
really and if the parent doesn't provide
that boundary then the child has to push
further and further and further and come
to a place that does not make them happy
it makes them anxious
um and uh and nervous so you you know
okay so let's let's segue there then
because that look that I'm going to tell
you a little story here and then you'll
see where I'm going with this very
quickly so there's this individual in
the Biden Administration in Washington
and uh he's in charge of disposal of all
nuclear waste in the U.S if I remember
correctly now he's uh uh non-binary by
public pronouncement he's bald often has
a mustache wears pretty flashy dresses
and uh has posted a fair bit of his
sexual behavior publicly so you can find
pictures of him for example splayed out
on a slab bondaged up in rope all
prepared for whatever activity he's
prone to
engage in there are pictures of him with
men kneeling by his side with dog masks
on like he's quite a bit of fun and so
um you might save if you were skeptical
that he's pushing the boundaries
and he keeps pushing them and pushing
them and and so far he hasn't found any
boundaries because not only has he not
been stopped in his public display of
his impulse of Hedonism let's say but
he's been highly rewarded because not
only was he granted a very Plum
government position which he may or may
not have been competent enough to occupy
but he also got a tremendous amount of
publicity for it and then you might
think well that's good enough you know
he's those aren't he he didn't need to
encounter any boundaries he was just
pursuing his individuated creativity but
then it turned out a month and a half
ago that he
he he stole a suitcase from an airport
in Minnesota and it happened to be a
suitcase full of women's clothing and
then he happened to lie about it to the
police and said that it was an accident
and he got called out on the carpet
pretty hard for that socially but he
didn't get fired because apparently that
even that wasn't pushing the envelope
far enough and so then you know what
that wasn't good enough for him he had
to go to bloody California and steal
another suitcase and get caught
and this time he got fired and so
so you talked about this bias towards
liberal parenting let's say and you put
that in the context of children pushing
the boundaries and you put it in the
context of anxiety so let's let's think
of it this way children and adults can
be overwhelmed by the complexity of the
world and they want
a structure like a game to hold back
that complexity that's why you need
routines in your household that's why
you need
predictability in terms of your
caretakers that's why you need rules of
the game it's so that things don't get
out of hand
now let's say that you adopt an
extremely uh
liberal
parenting orientation and your children
start to push the boundaries
well you're not going to stop them and
so that means they're going to push the
boundaries harder and harder and that's
going to make them more and more anxious
because there's not enough structure and
then let's say they hit teenage hood and
puberty and maybe you're unfortunate you
have a girl who hits puberty a little
early and she's a little immature and
she's little on the
little sensitive to negative emotion
maybe not quite as popular as she might
be and she's quite confused and anxious
and she starts pushing the boundaries
pretty damn hard on the gender identity
front
and then you've got real trouble
especially if she's also being exposed
to a parcel of idiot teachers who are
doing everything they possibly can to
capitalize on her confusion
and so it seems to me that what we are
seeing in the Gen on the gender
dysphoria front which is a form of
social contagion and a psychogenic
epidemic is an extension of boundary
pushing Behavior it's so a girl can come
up to her parent when she's 12 and and
do a bunch of things at the same time
she can say
but I think maybe I'm a boy
okay so what exactly is going on there
well certainly a challenge to social
Authority it's challenged to parental
Authority it's an expression of a deep
discontent and and and a level of
chaotic anxiety and confusion
and then it's also the only way as far
as I can tell that the child can test
the relationship between the teachers
and their ideologies say gender
affirming ideology and the rules that at
home that the parents are trying to
abide by because the kids at school are
going to be taught look everybody's got
a subjectively defined identity and you
might not be as masculine or feminine as
you've been led to believe and anyone
who tells you different is a detestable
bigot to such a degree that you should
actually keep all of this secret and
never even talk to them it's like how
the hell is a kid going to sort through
all that without going home and saying
something like Mom sometimes I think
maybe I'm a girl
like because they're not going to be
able to delineate this out in some
complex philosophical manner adults
can't bloody well do that
and so sorry that's a bit of a rant but
you can see where I'm going here well
yeah I mean how can kids how can
teenagers rebel against their parents
anymore they they you know they can't be
Goths they can't be punks they can't be
Emos they can go into you know drugs and
drink maybe but
um it's it's the adolescent's job is to
separate from the parents and we know
that adolescents are far more influenced
by their peer group than their parents
and this is the
Agony for parents because they're at an
age where parents should be letting go
should be
um widening those those that boundary so
that the child can push against the
boundary of the outside world more as
they
take this journey which is from
childhood to adulthood it's not any you
know it's it's a rocky road for a lot of
teenagers most I would say
um and so so that pushing against the
boundaries
it part of that job is to reject the
parents and protect reject the parents
values
and so we so parents of adolescents are
even more
um in a position where
um they're tearing their hair out
because they know that if if they're
giving advice to their children that's
not the advice their kids are listening
to they're listening to the to what's
going on in the peer group so it's a
huge thing for society to have been put
on to this generation of children
and that parents feel helpless about and
the parents job in adolescence is really
to walk to tread that line and
particularly in this area of
speaking the truth giving their children
facts that is a responsibility of
parents and you may be the only person
in that child's life who is doing that
and it's also to allow the child more
freedom and more freedom of expression
so it's a real dance between and it's
all about keeping up a good strong
relationship with that child and keeping
communication channels open right well
in some ways you could think about the
model you used which is
say integration versus individuation is
that
as the child becomes more autonomous
putting more stress on individuation
makes more and more sense right because
you've already laid down the groundwork
for their social acceptance and then as
they move into adolescence first of all
they can't abide by your household rules
entirely because they'd never leave home
if that was the case right they have to
have that drive towards independence and
that's going to mean establishing their
own
system of values in some sense so that
they can move away from you and do that
autonomously and so they are going to be
set against you in some real sense the
problem is is that well
I suppose part of the problem that
parents run into at the moment is that
the that's been weaponized that
proclivity has been weaponized in the
name of this this extremely strange
gender ideology that insists that
identity well we can take that apart a
little bit that might be useful
so one of the things that really strikes
me as odd as a psychologist there's two
things I suppose when I I look at modern
claims about identity
the first is that
identity is subjectively defined I think
that is so utterly preposterous I can't
believe that we've we're even
entertaining it as a culture it's so
idiotic every single time I have a
conversation with my wife
or with anyone else for that matter but
let's say with my wife I'm negotiating
my identity
just as she's negotiating hers because
we have our viewpoints and our
proclivities for action and
we have our each of us have our
tendency to insist that our way is the
right way but if you're going to be
around other people you have to
constantly negotiate that so that you
can stand each other and so
a real identity is actually the ability
to negotiate the transformation of your
own identity in a social space it has
nothing to do with you subjectively
defining your identity so that's now the
as far as I can tell the only people who
are unable to negotiate identity and who
insist upon having it subjectively
defined are literally two years old
because according to Piaget and and
there's some good research support for
the basic outlines of his theory two
two-year-olds are two egocentric to
negotiate a shared play Space so their
identity is subjectively divine and
they're almost entirely hedonistically
oriented which means they run by whim
which everyone knows if you're around
two-year-olds and they can't play with
other children
okay so the idea that identity is
subjectively defined is utterly
preposterous and it's actually an
anti-truth because if you try to Define
your identity subjectively you are a
bloody Tyrant and you're going to be an
unpopular one too and you deserve it but
then secondarily we have this other
weird insistence
and I I don't know why we've become so
demented that we also accept this that
your identity is subjectively defined
but nonetheless the core element of your
identity
is some immutable group characteristic
and the one we stress most is sexual
attraction
and I suppose the secondary one is
something like race it's like so
it's so peculiar that your identity is
subjectively defined but it's also boxed
into this very narrow set of parameters
which is well the most important thing
about you is
who and to what degree to whom and to
what degree are you sexually attracted
like I that's just
it just leaves me speechless well it
doesn't but you get my point
so I I think what we're saying is is the
is this idea of subjective identity
identity taken to its absolute extreme
because you're right true you know up to
two years old it amazes me how so many
parent parenting books are based on
building your child's self-esteem well
sorry your child is born your child is
only self-esteem nothing else you know
they for their survival they have to be
so it's not the adult's job to build the
child's self-esteem as if that's
something we can put on them it's part
of your child's interaction with life
with the environment we're in
relationships that build self esteem so
it might be achievement it might be yeah
something that you can do something that
you achieve and then you feel good about
yourself it's not your parents always
telling you you're amazing you're
brilliant
um and praising them and so and also
that I that idea of the of identity it's
the idea of the self this this thing
that you're supposed to be born with and
I don't know what myself is yet and I'm
63. you know I'm going to I I don't know
because it changes it changes according
to circumstances I don't know if I'd be
a great person to be uh on a Lifeboat
with for example you know and and
you know would I would I be the one that
stood up and saved people helped save
others would I or would I be so scared I
don't know
um I don't know myself and I don't
believe there is a fixed self that we
move through life with we're we're
always changing according to to our
circumstances and
um and and our environment and perhaps
we get to know ourselves a bit better
but we can still fool ourselves we can
still be dishonest about who we are to
our to ourselves so that idea that child
possesses this innate identity innate
sense of self
um it's one of the ways that we now well
apart from the fact that it's it's
nonsense we the position the roles have
been completely reversed between adult
and child so we are encouraged to see
children as wise and as knowing
themselves and
um that we follow the child we follow
you know you hear parents say oh I've
learned far more from my child than
they've ever learned from me well that's
the wrong way around you know you you
are the adult you are the one that's
gathered life experience and hopefully
some wisdom and again to put that
respond you know that responsibility
onto a child to be the the all-knowing
um fount of wisdom and we do that to
teenagers as well but when you look at
the Adolescent years that identity
formation becomes really the
adolescent's job who am I so I'm not a
child anymore I'm developing into an
adult who am I what is and what
teenagers do is they find their tribe
and they find and they in in a way they
they integrate before they can
individuate because they find the tribe
and they wear the same and they speak
the same language and they like to say
music or now YouTube videos and and the
rules that you know we may mock this you
know I've heard people mock it but it's
it it's absolutely right that you know
it's a stage of development and now the
only tribe that you might describe as
any kind of counterculture is trans
having a gender and sexual identity and
there is no other tribe that children
can join to show that they don't conform
or that they're a bit different or that
you know it's it's it's it's only gender
identity now
so if you want to be
um seen as boring and conventional and
traditional and conservative and
everything that a teenager doesn't want
to appear to be
they then you know you have to join that
tribe and at least say oh I'm non-binary
or I you know to to to be able to show
that side of yourself unless you're
really comfortable in the idea that
you're that you're conventional and you
don't have a problem with that yeah well
that means that means that they've
captured so
and I'll go in two directions with
regard to what you said years ago I did
a study with uh colleague of mine at
Harvard on when tattooing and piercing
first entered the cultural scene and we
were curious about whether that was a
marker for Psychopathology or or what
was predicting the adoption of these new
fashion trends and what we found
overwhelmingly was that it wasn't
associated with an increased prevalence
of mental illness it was associated with
high trait openness and that's the
creativity Dimension from the big five
trait openness and when you see people
with rainbow colored hair or you know
multi-colored hair and piercings and so
forth you're looking at people who are
on the creative end of the distribution
and the point you're making is in part
that the
the collapse of the entire domain of
non-conformity into gender identity also
entices the Creative Kids Creative Kids
have more mutable identities too so they
claim that well I'm a different person
from day to day is particularly germane
to Creative Kids because a creative
person is quite different from day to
day that's actually the definition of
creativity and if you're creative and
high in negative emotion that's even
worse because not only are you mutable
on the identity side that's actually
your identity that mutability you're
also very very volatile in terms of your
moods and so the idea that identity is
only mutable can be very very attractive
to you now I also wanted to make a
comment technically about self-esteem so
I spent a lot of time analyzing
self-esteem psychometrically because as
a clinician I was extremely skeptical of
the social psychological research
purporting to indicate for example that
there was even such a thing as
self-esteem
because we Bandy about these words but
that doesn't mean they have a
corresponding grounding in reality so I
looked at and conducted Factor analytics
studies which were designed to assess
what exactly self-esteem was and it's
quite straightforward and and people who
are listening might find this extremely
useful practically
there's no such thing as self-esteem
what there is is
trait neuroticism which is proclivity to
and to anxiety and pain essentially
emotional and physical so people differ
in their thresholds for being anxious
and hurt and if you're more sensitive
well then you'll see threats before
people who are less sensitive and that
can be useful and if you're less
sensitive well then you're more robust
and maybe more daring and that can be
useful nope there's no way of saying
what's right in that situation however
if you're high in neuroticism if you're
high in sensitivity to negative emotion
you do experience a lot of anxiety and
depression
okay so self-esteem is basically
neuroticism minus extroversion
an extroversion is the positive emotion
Dimension and so
highly neurotic people so people
sensitive to negative emotion are more
likely to be self-conscious and to think
negative thoughts about themselves but
that doesn't mean that it's
a fractured self-concept that's driving
the negative emotion that's simply not
true that negative emotional state is
actually Baseline temperament you can
measure it in infants you can measure it
in kids that are six months old and you
can ameliorate it to some degree if you
have a child who's sensitive to negative
emotion and you facilitate their
exploration their autonomous exploration
they can normalize their
psychophysiology
okay so first of all there's no such
thing as self-esteem it's basically
trait neuroticism and second you do not
remediate trait and eroticism by getting
people to focus on their feelings in
fact making people self-conscious about
their feelings makes trait neuroticism
worse because there's no difference
between being self-conscious and being
high in trading or Autism
so and then the the last part of all of
that that's preposterous is you
certainly don't
remediate people's self-esteem you talk
about this in your book with regards to
over Praise by continually telling
children how wonderful they are because
what actually regulates their negative
emotion to say it again
isn't their internal psychological state
or their attitude towards themselves
it's whether or not other people like to
have them around
so if you have a child who's very
popular surrounded by friends who's got
a couple of best friends whose teachers
respond positively to them who other
parents respond to well who can regulate
their behavior when they're out in
public in a grocery store or restaurant
so that adults are kind and smile to
them the probability that they're going
to experience negative excess negative
emotion is tremendously ameliorated
and so that's another strike on the
conservative side like a a hit on the
conservative side of the parenting
Spectrum it's like you help make your
children socially acceptable and you
will increase their self-esteem you
don't do that by giving them
participation awards at school and
falsely inflating their ego
you don't ride an elevator for the music
or choose an airline for their movie
selection when it comes to audio
entertainment it makes sense to choose
audible audible is the home of
Storytelling whether it's an epic
adventure a chilling mystery or a can't
miss comedy it houses all your audio
entertainment audiobooks podcasts and
Originals in one single app so that you
can find the best of what you love or
discover something new as an audible
member you can choose one title per
month to keep from their entire catalog
including the latest best sellers and
new releases
members also get full access to a
growing selection of included audiobooks
audible originals and podcasts you can
download or stream included titles all
you want you can even listen to Dr
Peterson's Beyond order on Audible let
audible help you discover new ways to
laugh Be Inspired or be entertained new
members can try it for free for 30 days
visit audible.com Peterson or text
Peterson to 500-500 that's audible.com
Peterson or text Peterson to 500 500 to
try audible free for 30 days audible.com
Peterson
[Music]
that's really interesting what you say
about self-esteem yeah because it's very
it it's it is bandaged around it it's
part of parenting advice you know so
much now but but really what what does
it mean does it mean a sense of
satisfaction with yourself does it mean
because there is a a healthy you know I
I guess there's there's like a healthy
kind of confidence that you in in life
but again I think that's so much
generated by how you react with the
worlds we're social creatures and if we
cannot have or develop a positive
relationship with the world and our
environment and the people we meet and
then then we're not likely to have a
feeling of of kind of confidence in
ourselves but I think you're right about
the that there are there are innate
personality characteristics or
temperaments
um and they can be tempered and they can
be helped so that the child is
um you get the positive side of that
more than the negative side because with
every temperament there is a positive
and a negative and that what you want is
to go with your child's
character or personality and and and and
and encourage the positive side of that
more than facilitating the negative and
maybe that's maybe that's the closest we
can get to building your child's
self-esteem
well I talked to this psychologist a
week two weeks ago Gene twangy and
twangy is pretty good psychologist she's
a good statistician she's good at Miss
psychological measurement which is
really important when you're dealing
with the sorts of things we're talking
about and for a long time on the
self-esteem front there was this idea
that positive affirmations for children
were the way to self-esteem but that was
dependent on the theory that your level
of negative emotion was dependent on
your attitude towards yourself something
like that it was only a psychological
variable but what twangy found was that
all that
false praise that devaluation of the
currency of reward that over
generalization of of uh insistence upon
your child's singular wonderfulness at
the expense of other people it didn't
improve self-esteem what it did was
inflate narcissism
so then you got the best of both worlds
you got kids that were just as miserable
on the negative emotion front just as
confused and anxious but they're also
narcissistic and so that actually
produced a bit of a spiral because you
know it's it's it's a little bit more
difficult to make friends if you're high
in negative emotion because you're a bit
more volatile you're a bit more
sensitive you're also a little more
timid in your social interactions so you
already got a couple of things working
against you now if you add a nice
healthy dose of narcissism to that
then you're going to produce a child
who's unbelievably unpopular and
dislikable because there's almost no one
more dislikable than a neurotic
narcissist that's a that's a tough
combination too because you get that
hypersensitivity along with grandiosity
you might be able to tolerate one of
those but man the combination of that's
pretty damn unbearable and so all this
idiot insistence on
self-esteem through continual
affirmation
you know that would also be part and
parcel of the elimination of competition
in schools right because you don't want
anybody to lose because God only knows
what that might do to their self-concept
and their self-esteem
you produce this increase in
self-centered narcissism and you make
kids more isolated and miserable and
lonely than they would have otherwise
had to be it's a real Perfect Storm a
lot of that can be laid at the feet of
social psychologists by the way
so doing very very badly
thought through and analyzed research in
clinical domains the Soho self-esteem
bloody monstrous movement that that's
one of the catastrophes that's emerged
out of the research fields
I I also think parents have encouraged
have been encouraged to be therapists to
their children to be counselors and what
you mentioned earlier about feelings
um this when I worked with parents it
was constantly you know a child would
come home and say oh somebody kicked me
in the playground and the first question
from the parent was not so what did you
do about it or what happened but and how
did that make you feel and like you know
that that and how did that make you feel
and how did you feel about that
and and what it does is it gives power
to feelings above actions and so you you
get a child who then the child stops and
thinks well how did I feel about it and
it's usually you know sad or angry or
happy you know this sort of very limited
range of feeling words and uh and so
then the child's thinking that's the
important thing uh and it's always back
to the child looking internally rather
than looking outside and saying so this
was what the situation was and then
maybe if the child was uh being bullied
or maybe if the child had a part in it
we you know we listen to that we can you
know perhaps help the child manage it
better next time or maybe the child
doesn't have a problem with it at all
it's just sharing some information with
us but if we bring that back every time
to the child's feelings and the child is
growing up thinking my feelings are the
most important thing okay so so let's
let's let's look at that so first of all
we might ask what the hell do we mean by
feeling
and what we mean is something like
immediate emotional response
okay and then we say well feelings are
Paramount we're also simultaneously
saying immediate emotional response is
Paramount okay so let's just think about
that for a minute so let's say my wife
says something that makes me angry
all right so why aren't I just right
it's like you just said something that
made me angry now I'm angry my feelings
are Paramount I'm angry I feel like
hurting you let's say because I'm so
angry why am I not right in doing that
and why are we insisting to children
that they're instantaneous emotional
impulse is the appropriate marker for
reality because the Alternatives would
be well
who cares what you felt about it
what did you do about it or
on the bullying front let's say what are
you going to do about it independent of
your feelings whether you're angry or
upset or or looking for a fight or
challenged whatever I want to know how
you're going to cope with this situation
actively so it doesn't occur again and
then by walking through that let's say
if you're talking to a teenager you're
also privileging thinking over feeling
and so then you might say well what is
thinking and the answer is
thinking and acting are what mature
people replace feeling with
so the only time we need to feel
something especially on the negative
emotion side is really when things don't
go the way we want them to go
so you feel forget about positive
emotion for a minute you feel
inconsequence of inadequate adaptation
that's like a rule and so to privilege
feeling means you're privileging
inadequate adaptation
and you're also saying well your first
impulsive whim which is driven by these
basic biological mechanisms that are
very ID like in the Freudian sense
they're not sophisticated At All by
making them Paramount you raise them to
the point of the highest virtue the
highest virtue is what you feel and then
it's even worse than that Stephanie
because this is so awful it really is
if you do careful linguistic analysis of
communicative content
one of the things and emotions let's say
communicative content and emotion
one of the things you find reliably is
all self-conscious thoughts
load on neuroticism
so there is literally no difference
between thinking about how you feel and
being miserable they are exactly the
same thing so what you're doing which is
so into it's so sad right but you can
you can kind of understand this if you
think about self-consciousness so
imagine you're on stage and you're
delivering a talk and all of a sudden
you get self-conscious
what do you think self-consciousness is
a good thing it's like no it's not you
sweat you blush you stutter you forget
what you're doing you collapse into
yourself you get self-centered you don't
pay attention to the audience you're no
longer able to communicate and it can be
a real catastrophe like people can get
so self-conscious on stage that they
develop a phobia of public speaking and
that's all pathology of
self-consciousness
and so now what we do with our children
at every bloody turn and they do this in
school all the time well how are you
feeling how are you feeling how are you
feeling how are you feeling and the the
other implication there and you talk a
lot about non-verbal behavior in your in
your book and how we communicate with
children
we're also telling our children all the
time that
if you feel bad
anxiety let's say or some emotional pain
that's so awful
that that's all sensible and caring
adults should ever care about
and so what kind of message is that for
children it's like oh my God you know
you were upset at school what a
cataclysm that is we we should probably
restructure the entire social apparatus
so that never even happens once
it's so it's it's multi-dimensionally
Preposterous and it's really hurting
kids to make them self-conscious like
that so I love what you say about
self-consciousness and causing
depression and and I mean it's you can
see it so clearly in this idea that
children or adolescents in particular
now have this new
um a childhood task of exploring their
gender identity because what does that
mean other than they must look at their
every Behavior the way they like to
dress everything that there was a book I
read um which is about it's a workbook
for teenagers on exploring your gender
identity and basically you're looking at
every aspect of your personality
Everything About You in relating it to
gender does that make me a girl or does
that make me a boy and it's of course
it's inevitably based on stereotypes it
can't be anything else because because
Boys Can't experience female things like
menstruation and girls can't experience
male things like
erections let's say you know it's got to
be stereotypes there's nothing else and
you know one of these books that I read
Because teenagers now there's a plethora
of books including workbooks to help you
along your gender Journey it's sometimes
called a quest
uh it's it's this sort of Adventure and
and it was talking about Ben's in a
river but each time you get to a bend in
the river you stop and you think and
about your gender identity well gender
identity is a is a meaningless concept
anyway it's it's it's not you know
scientifically supported that we have
this thing but
it's it's a way to to get teenagers to
constantly be looking at themselves
looking at their
um motivations and analyzing their
actions which I think it's weird
it will inevitably create mental health
issues inevitably yeah well look look
here's here's what it's analogous to
okay so imagine that
there are twists and turns in the in the
bends of the river of your marriage
and there are constant micro challenges
and disputes that emerge in the course
of the marriage okay here's the new rule
okay every time you encounter any doubt
whatsoever in your life
question the Integrity of your marriage
right okay so here's what happens to a
depressed person
so let's say you have a little bit of a
dispute with your husband
and uh it produces a little negative
emotion and you think
oh my God I'm always I caused some
trouble that's the first thought I
caused some trouble here's the next
thought I've caused a lot of trouble in
the past
next thought I caused a lot of trouble
in the present and I'm likely to
continue to cause a lot of trouble in
the future
okay a person who causes a lot of
trouble in the past present and future
they're really not a very good person
they're not really fit for a marriage
they're probably not fit to live I
should commit suicide
okay so that's how a depressive person
thinks now think about how that works so
you go from a micro challenge if you
have a little scrap with your with your
wife and then you take yourself apart
right down to the foundation and the
foundation in that case would be do you
even have the right to exist
and so a depressive person has no
defense against that Cascade of doubt
okay so now imagine this is what we're
doing to children we know that children
establish the ability to distinguish
between male and female extremely early
they can do that as infants they can
likely do it as newborns
so that ability to distinguish between
male and female is fundamental
the reason it's fundamental obviously is
because if you can't distinguish between
male and female you're not going to
reproduce
so now we know not only is that true
biologically but also conceptually it
seems the case that the distinction
between masculine and feminine
symbolically
is a distinction that's at the bottom of
our ability to perceive as such we tend
to make
gendered categories in the world almost
automatically so there might be no more
fundamental perceptual category than
sexual differentiation it might be more
fundamental than up or down
or darker light it's at least in the
same domain so this is now what we're
doing to it to teenagers when they're
confused we're saying every time you
manifest even a shred of doubt about
anything
the first thing you should do is
question the most fundamental element of
your being
and you should do that continually and
then it's even worse than that even
though that's really bad because we're
dooming them to something like anxious
depression by doing that
it's even worse than that because well
let's say I've been reading about this
uh like Demi I think it's Demi boy
identity
and sort of well mostly
mostly you're a boy but sometimes you
feel that you're a girl it's something
like that or maybe I have it backwards I
don't really give a damn to tell you the
truth but here's the problem with that
it's like
let's say you have a non-standard gender
identity
okay what the hell are other people
supposed to do about that like what are
the rules here right because if you're a
woman I kind of know how to treat you
I'm going to do it in a stereotyped way
to begin with because I don't know who
the hell you are so I'm going to use you
know low resolution approximations and
those are going to be stereotypes
they're no different than categories and
then when I get to know you all
particularize it but if I don't know
whether you're male or female
what the hell should I do with you you
don't know because you don't know what
the rules are and so the simplest thing
for me to do is just not do anything
with you the simplest thing for me to do
is go find someone else who's a hell of
a lot less trouble and who's willing to
abide by the social norms enough so that
they don't present a mass of
indeterminate confusion on immediate
confrontation and then you know the
repost from the transgender side is well
if you're a little more tolerant you'd
know how to give me what I want it's
like I don't have a bloody clue how to
give you what I want what you want I
have no idea
I don't know how to give me what I want
I can barely management with management
with my wife I certainly have no idea
what to give a bald man with a mustache
in a red dress
I have no idea what to do with you and
neither do you no one knows the rules so
we tell kids question your identity
specify your non-binary orientation
but then what like what's the life path
associated with that how are you going
to conduct yourself as an adult
as someone who's non-binary are you
going to get married
how are people going to treat you at
work what are you going to do with your
kids how are you going to dress
like you don't know the answer to any of
those and neither does anyone else those
aren't identities
they're not identities they're they're
masses of ideological confusion and
that's all an identity tells you
tells you and other people how to
perceive and how to conduct yourself
and man and woman boy girl male female
is stable categories they're reality and
to teach children any different to that
is to T is to lie to children and to lie
to teenagers and it's the most
distressing thing for me to observe this
going on that it's done in the name of
kindness it's done in the name of
compassion it's seen as the only
legitimate way uh to help these kids and
it's so cruel I mean I think you pointed
out before you're you're what you're
doing is you're affirming uh
particularly a teenage girl's
self-hatred and self-rejection and
absolute hatred and disgust about being
female you're affirming that and you're
saying yep you're right to feel that way
you know it's um you know reject let's
kill off that person
and let's replace that that defective
woman where or girl with a boy and we
agree with you the boy is so much better
this is who you really are so the LIE
there is like being a girl or a boy
isn't who you are it's what you are it's
just fact you know who you are is your
personality is your past you know
personality traits what you do whatever
being a boy or a great girl isn't who
you are but what it how it's sold to
children and it's sold to children at
the earlier stages I've counted as about
40 picture books for prime years now is
that it uses the messages that are given
to children now so be who you are be
yourself
um and the other you know when when to a
child you know who who hasn't developed
a self yet and it's not you know it's a
lifetime's job in my experience but then
also the other really strong messages
you know who you are and nobody else has
the right to question you now this is
indoctrination from the early years
onwards so age three as soon as children
start kindergarten these books exist
so what you're doing is you're taking
away from that child or this generation
of children the stability of reality and
the the ability to differentiate between
fantasy and reality at the most
fundamental level of who they are and we
the the way in this sense that we're
tree we're we're now the children and
they're the adults is is part of this
message that parents are given your your
child is born whole with a with a fully
deformed I mean fully formed sense of
self
and so yeah my four-year-old boy he know
oh she knows who she is you know it's
not up to us to question that our child
our child's wisdom
um and you know the child is dependent
on us
as parents uh our job and we don't even
see this as a job it's just automatic a
child will say look Mommy there's a dog
and we'll say yes it's a dog and we we
can't or that's a dog no darling
actually it's a cat we were constantly
constantly reinforce our growing child's
sense of what's real and what's not and
we correct them if they make mistakes
and we don't see that as a job it's just
sort of automatically what we do with
kids but that's what we're doing and
then but in this case alone we're saying
no that's you know you you you are
literally
a girl and we're approaching it as
adults who are thinking I am affirming
his gender identity not to the child
you're not you're telling that boy he's
literally a girl so for him he doesn't
maybe understand biological sex yet but
for him he's biologically female on the
child's level of understanding a trusted
adult is telling him he's he's a girl so
he's a girl right and providing and
reason for his confusion yes and no
that's a terrible thing yeah also the
fact that he has faced disapproval you
know typically from the parents from one
or other or both parents and perhaps
from A Wider Circle for the toy choices
he's making and and his friendships and
so as soon as you say to him he's a girl
and we get these sort of short-term
honeymoon kind of results of you know
increase he always suddenly he's really
happy well of course he is because now
all his toy choices are approved moved
off by the adults and of course what he
wants to do is win the approval of his
parents that's what he needs to do for
his survival so you've got you've got
this terrible lie being told to children
and you you you know and and I and I
feel exactly the same with teenagers yes
they're developmentally later on but
it's exactly the same lie and it it had
it it
IT addresses true teenagers specific
vulnerabilities of identity formation
we'll be right back in just a moment
first we wanted to give you a sneak peek
at Jordan's new documentary logos and
literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
Scripps memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johann Gover science and
religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all history and
hopefully people can walk away with at
least a sense of that
so there's no difference between being
self-conscious and being miserable
technically but here's something else
self-consciousness among females is much
more associated with body dysmorphia
now the reason there's a bunch of
reasons for that we don't know all of
them but here's a couple first of all at
puberty women start to experience more
negative emotion on average than men and
that it's not true of boys and girls but
it does seem to it does seem to kick in
at puberty and that's likely because
you get size dimorphism developing and
so it's reasonable for women to be a
little bit more timid about the physical
environment than men
but also women are more sexually
vulnerable
and also they have to care for infants
so being threat sensitive makes sense
okay any in any case those are three
possible reasons but it definitely kicks
in at puberty now it also is the case
that anxiety among women tends to take
the form of bodily self-consciousness
and I think the reason for that likely
this is a speculation although the other
the mere observation is a fact it's
likely because girls and women are
judged more comprehensively on their
physical appearance than men
so it makes sense that if they're going
to be self-conscious it's going to be
more bodily focused and then that's
particularly rough then the third
contributing factor is girls hit puberty
earlier than boys
so so now what you have a perfect storm
there so now you have a girl
and she's feeling a lot more anxious and
confused than she did before because she
hit puberty plus her body is doing 50
weird things plus she's getting all
sorts of strange attention from adults
that she never got before plus she
doesn't know how to fit in on the social
front and she's trying to make that
transition from childhood to adulthood
and so and then
you have people additionally torturing
about the fact that any deviation from
the norm on the stereotypical front
is actually an indication that she
doesn't exist in the correct body well
she doesn't really feel like she's in
the correct body to begin with
so it's a perfect storm for young girls
so when Canada came out with its
compelled pronoun law 2016. I talked to
the Canadian Senate I said you idiots in
your legislation you think you're going
to free up kids you're going to produce
a psychogenic and epidemic among young
women because they're preferentially
susceptible to psychogenic epidemics
which is why we had a bulimia epidemic
and an anorexia epidemic all of which
was spread by social media and a cunning
epidemic
and then there's a history of such
epidemics going back 300 years I mean
Freudian hysteria which was very
widespread in the Victorian times
although disappeared afterwards or
mutated was also a psychogenic epidemic
that preferentially affected young women
and so well I just wanted to lay out
some of the reasons why that's the case
higher levels of negative emotion and
more bodily focused self-consciousness
and so then you add to that a kind of
unpopularity because maybe a given girl
isn't that sophisticated at manifesting
what would you call it socially
acceptable feminine traits because it
takes a fair bit of sophistication to be
a well put together woman and you're
going to be pretty damn awkward at that
if you're kind of a clunky tomboy when
you're 12 and so well now you're
providing them with first of all a
unidimensional reason why they're
miserable
it's pretty damn convenient and no
wonder adolescent wants that it's like
do I have 50 problems
or do I have one
right and then you also entice them with
the additional social status that
they're going to receive by now
announcing that they're special and
having every bloody teacher in the
entire world plus the World At Large
focus on that narcissistic grandiosity
that goes along with the insistence of a
special identity
and the only price you have to pay is
cyclists the only price you have to pay
is like enforced sterilization and
surgical mutilation
fine deal for our teenagers I I think
there are another couple of things about
teenage girls that we don't
um pay as much attention to but the very
fact of physical development in teenage
girls means your body is sort of
ballooning you know breasts here hips
here bottom there
um and you lose that sort of
gender-neutral
um body that gave you so much freedom in
childhood and so what you how girls
experience puberty is moving from being
a free kind of person into being an
object because suddenly her body is
public property and as you say it it's
commented on everyone has a right to
comment on it
um she may you know she'll get comments
in the street she'll get she'll look all
around her and become aware of the
um objectification of women throughout
Society now I think this is happening to
boys much more that over the past decade
in in the kind of certainly
objectification of the male body and in
some cases kind of sexual
objectification of men
um and this generation I used to seeing
those really
um exaggerated images of femininity so
the feminine the female Heroes have
actually huge breasts and Tiny waists
and big hits Kim Kardashian yeah and the
and and the male Heroes and you see have
a ripped with a six-pack and they're
hulks so you get that in gaming you get
it in you know it sort of programs like
love Island which I don't know whether
you have in Canada
um it's all about how you look so it's
happening more for men and and
interestingly boys experiences of things
like
um anorexia have increased but not as
much as girls so girls are in a real
you know the Gap is still widening
also the emphasis and that that pressure
also comes on women younger not only do
they have puberty younger but also you
know on average cross-culturally women
prefer men who are four years older and
what that also means is that men prefer
women who are four years younger and
what although most of that's driven by
female Choice by the way but not all of
it but it also means that women come
under sexual pressure in some sense
earlier than boys do partly because of
earlier onset of puberty but also
because there's a tighter relationship
between biological fecundity and youth
in women than there is in men and so
that piles on the additional pressure
for for young women so there's an
overvaluation of female sexuality in
some real sense that kicks in around the
age of 13 and the advantage to that I
suppose is all the attractiveness of
Youth and Beauty but the disadvantage is
well there's a hell of a lot of
competition and judgment that goes along
with that particular contest and
certainly that does pile on a 12 year
old girl
well with overwhelming Force especially
when you also add to that the fact that
women are much more vulnerable on the
sexual front in some real sense because
they pay a much bigger price for well
for sexual misbehavior let's say than
men do given the risk of pregnancy
that's a good definition of what is a
Woman by the way
a woman is the human being that bears
disproportionate responsibility for
reproduction
it's a good biological definition too
and you're stuck with that right you
encounter that face first when you hit
puberty as a woman
and it's the constant I I think dilemma
for women individual women and for
feminism how to put those two things
together because you're right we have
the biological responsibility that may
that men don't have and along with that
I think the disgust with the female body
is quite is pretty much tied into that
because it kind of makes you an animal
um and and you're reduced to your
biology and so girls at puberty apart
from not being
developmentally ready to face all of
this ego sexual harassment I mean it's
in schools now there's there's an
epidemic of sexual harassment in schools
and not that girls should ever be ready
to face that but you know they're
they're so young and they can develop
breasts at primary school age 11 and
suddenly they are supposed to be a woman
when they are still emotionally a child
and how hard that is but also going back
to the absolute female facts of
menstruation how disgusting is that you
know that that's the real
um issue here of of developing
um sexually as female you bleed I mean
it's disgusting it is horrendous for for
girls you know or not not all girls you
know but it it it's one of the things I
think that happens that pubic minimum
it's a challenge it's a challenge and it
can be really embarrassing and
humiliating it can create anxiety and
worry it can create you know pain and
and feelings of real discomfort and
and all the associated physical effects
that go with it which boys don't
experience so boys will get taller and
broader and it's kind of everything that
they were were before just sort of gets
bigger but more but more yeah whereas
with girls completely changed it
suddenly oh I'm swelling out here and
I'm swelling out here and my body's out
of control and if you've got an image of
yourself as being intelligent maybe even
intellectual bit different all of those
you know it can be so humiliating to
feel actually no I'm just an animal I'm
just a piece of meat my body will go on
doing this and I have no control over
that at all that can be really
frightening and it can be so all of this
now what is awful now is that we don't
look at girls even though there's this
massive you know 75 teenage girls going
being referred to gender clinics we
don't look at them as teenage girls
because of course that's transphobic
and this this um lack of a
differentiation between male and female
means that they're all lumped together
as trans kids and all of the issues are
seen as the same and we know in medicine
that the female body and and women are
not you know looked at properly anyway
but this is really exacerbated that
problem that we're not looking at gender
dysphoria in girls even to say that
girls is transphobic but we're not
looking at it within a framework of of
female adolescent health and the all of
the other issues
that helps us move into a domain that
maybe we can cover just as we bring this
to a close you've written a fair bit too
about
what what I would characterize I don't
want to put words in your mouth as the
absolutely pathological Stampede of
idiot medical and psychological
professional organizations to insist
upon gender affirming therapy so as a
therapist I'd like to point something
out which is
the last thing I'm ever going to do for
any of my clients to come when they come
and see me is affirm their identity
that is not my job my job is to listen
to my client
and help them understand their current
identity and develop it in the direction
that appears most appropriate as a
consequence of the course of our
discussions so I presume people come to
see me
because they're miserable for one reason
or another I don't know why they're
miserable it might be terrible
circumstances it might be something they
brought upon themselves it might be some
combination of both but I certainly
don't presume to know and that's in some
real sense a disturbance and identity
and then what the therapeutic realm is
is a place to explore the vagaries of
identity now I'm not there to affirm my
clients identity nor to deny it
right I'm supposed to be there as a
neutral ignorant listener it's like
you're complicated I don't know who the
hell you are what's wrong with you we're
going to
lay out a space of honest communication
and try to develop a differentiated
model of your identity and then try to
optimize it now then you get this
insistence now that the professional
colleges have brought in which is
no matter what your client tells you
when they you first encounter them you
have to agree with that
or you're unprofessional to the point
where your license can be reasonably not
only reasonably suspended but should be
ethically suspended and I look at that
and I think oh well the whole
therapeutic and most of the medical
establishments just done if I have an
anorexic girl come in to me and say
I had an anorexic client once very thin
girl as you might expect she wasn't very
big and uh I had her sit by me at one
point I said look at your thighs and now
you look at mine and you tell me which
one's bigger she said that hers was and
I said okay fair enough so this is what
we're going to do I'm going to put a
piece of paper under your thigh and I'm
going to have you trace it and then I'm
going to put it under my
so and I'm going to do the same thing
and I want you to watch so you see I'm
not playing any tricks okay so we did
that of course my thighs are about that
much bigger on both sides than hers and
I swear she looked at that piece of
paper for 20 minutes
now she trusted me by this point eh so
she knew already that I wasn't playing
tricks but she still couldn't believe
her eyes and I think the reason for that
is that I don't think that anorexic
women can see their bodies properly they
lose the ability to see the Gestalt and
they focus on in detail and then they
can't distinguish between what's fatty
and what's bone let's say literally they
can't see it and so but I wouldn't if an
anorexic girl came into my office and
said you know I feel that my thighs are
too fat
I wouldn't say well if you feel that you
must be right and it would be
inappropriate unethical of me to suggest
otherwise I would say well
maybe you want to explore that maybe you
don't I don't know if you have any
doubts about it I don't know if this
concern is causing you trouble I don't
know if other people are reacting badly
to your insistence that you're too fat
still those are things we could discuss
I can't say no however you feel is right
and certainly on the
sexual identity front or the gender
identity front exactly the same
standards apply so those are even more
fundamental categories than thin or fat
so I just think it's the death of the
therapeutic Enterprise altogether
so and an unbelievable cowardice and
lies on the part of the professional
organizations and it's presented as
conversion therapy to do anything other
than a firm a child's self-diagnosis and
self um prescription of treatment
um and again it ties into what's what's
happening in parenting whereas I I think
it's a good thing that we listen to
Children more now because children
weren't you know when I was growing up
children really weren't listened to at
all
um and that's good but listening to a
child seems to be interpreted as
agreeing with the child on everything so
if you know a therapist's job is to
listen there's a lot of listening in in
you know
um counseling or therapy but it doesn't
mean agreeing and we you know so we give
up our knowledge our perspective
um our knowledge of facts in order to
placate or appease or in somehow uh in
the misguided way thinking that we're
building the the self-esteem of the
other person but we don't you know
that's never helpful certainly you know
long term that's not a helpful thing to
do we could also point out
and should that all therapy is
conversion therapy
right the whole bloody point of the
therapeutic process is transformation
now you could say well you shouldn't
convert the client into a clone of the
therapist's presuppositions and that's
definitely true what you want to do you
know when I saw my clients the first
thing I would try to find out is okay
what why are you suffering how and why
are you suffering and that's really
complicated I could take hundreds of
hours to figure out because maybe
it's a psychological Quirk or maybe it's
a catastrophe of situation and God only
knows how to differentiate those so you
have to listen a bunch so the first is
well
how are you suffering and why and then
the next is well
if you had your way and you could
Envision things being better
well
what would better mean for you and how
would you envision that practically and
so that's on the client right you don't
want to interfere with that because like
you can you can offer your opinion you
can say how you've seen other people
solve that problem but you don't want to
muck about with that too much because
each person has to come up with a
somewhat particularized solution to that
problem I don't know what your life
would be like if you optimized it for
you you know in your particular
situation so we have talk about that a
lot and then the third thing we do is
talk about strategy you know now we kind
of know what the problem is we have some
sense of what might hypothetically be a
solution we could delineate out
potential strategies for achieving it
but all that's predicated on discussion
and none of that has anything to do with
affirmation except I guess what you
affirm as a therapist is you affirm the
utility of honest communication
and you affirm the idea that through
honest communication and inquiry
positive conversion is possible Right
conversion towards some more ideal state
of being very difficult thing to manage
but you certainly don't do that by
privileging your clients feelings Above
All Else
and then by being terrified into
Silence with regards to the responses
you might have to an inquiry
so it's really it's really something to
behold you know when you you talk about
the role of compassion in that
hypothetical compassion you know one of
the things I see continually poor
parents say the people the claim is
being made constantly that unless you
give way to your child's
desire to transition they're they're
going to commit suicide
and would you rather have a trans child
or a dead child that's a question that's
often asked to parents okay so I want to
take that apart for a minute number one
even the bloody American Psychological
Association which has become a very
pathological organization
admits in their in their documents of
affirming care and they do this by
pointing to Prejudice there are no good
long-term follow-up studies on the life
course history of trans individuals and
then they say well that's because of
prejudice against trans individuals and
be that as it may
I don't care about that at the moment
there are no long-term studies
so how the hell do you know that you're
elevating or decreasing the suicide risk
and the answer is you don't know and
that's a lie and second
we know perfectly well that most of the
kids most people who have who manifest
any form of Psychopathology have a core
set of symptoms
and those symptoms are basically
elevated negative emotion anxiety and
pain so anxiety and depression you don't
have a mental illness except for maybe
Mania where
anxiety and pain aren't part of it okay
so then the question is if there is a
risk for suicide associated with gender
dysphoria
is it specific to the gender dysphoria
or is it merely a consequence of the
fact that all forms of Psychopathology
are associated with anxiety and
depression and suicidality is associated
with anxiety and depression and the
answer is unless you have compelling
evidence that it's specific to gender
dysphoria then the appropriate thing to
do scientifically is to assume that it's
a consequence of anxiety and depression
and quit riding vulnerable parents with
guilt
so well so for those of you who are
watching and listening and struggling
with these sorts of things don't let
idiot teachers and counselors tell you
that by objecting to your child's gender
dysphoria you're elevating the risk of
suicide because that is a lie
there is no evidence to support it but
the claim made is that your child is
more likely to commit suicide if they
are not affirmed and and allowed to go
into puberty blockers that's the claim
there's there's no evidence to support
that at all
um parents can be supportive in lots of
different ways but parents are being
bullied in the cruelest way imaginable
to affirm their child and go into this
medical pathway so this you know and
they kind of contain you the thing is
now that not only parents but all young
people know that part of the Persona
part of the rules of the tribe of being
transgender are having suicidal ideation
you know that's part of make what makes
you true trans so it's the most
irresponsible I I cannot understand why
the Samaritans hasn't spoken out about
it why I you know government ministers
have not spoken out about it we know
about the
um contagious possibilities of this of
suicide we know the dangers of saying
suicide is down to one factor
we we know that and yet we let this
carry on in this area and this is where
you know this is the these are the kind
people yeah well this is okay so let's
close up with this so I've been thinking
recently that our conceptualizations of
narcissism are too one-sided
I think we concentrate on
grandiose narcissism sort of more
masculine form of narcissism more than
we concentrate on the more feminine form
of narcissism and I think the female the
feminine narcissism is something like
narcissism of compassion
and that's associated with this idea the
Freudian idea of the edible mother who
what would you say Fosters a sense of
hyperdependence the helicopter parent
now males can do that too but but it's
more likely to occur on the female side
because females are more agreeable and
they are more compassionate so the
reason that we're I think part of the
reason that no one is speaking out
against that while you are and I have
and there's a few people who are but
but the reason that you get slaughtered
so badly if you do
is because the narcissists of compassion
come after you and they say well it
isn't like you care for children you're
just mean we care for them so much that
we'll listen to them no matter what we
say and then the underground message
there isn't we're doing best for
children the underground message is look
how much we care don't we deserve to
have our social status elevated merely
on that grounds and maybe right to the
highest possible point we're so
compassionate that we're mother Mary
herself right it's nothing but the
Mother of God's voice talking here and
so anybody who is who is antithetical to
that broad scale and all-encompassing
compassion is instantly what deemed an
agent of Satan for all intents and
purposes and but it's so absolutely I
saw this woman so she was a Disney
executive and uh she was testifying if I
remember correctly when Florida was
clamping down on Disney and she said she
was the head of their domestic
programming something like that she said
well I have a trans child and a
pansexual child and one's five and one
seven and I thought okay let's just
think about that statistically for like
one tenth of a second
the probability that you have a trans
child is one in three thousand before
the gender dysphoria epidemic hit one in
three thousand okay what's the chance
that you have a pansexual job now I have
no idea what the hell pansexual means
but I know that whatever it is it's
rarer than transsexual
so at minimum you have a one in three
thousand chance that you have a
pansexual child so what's the
probability that you have a pansexual
and a transsexual child and the answer
is one in nine million
so here's the question are you a
pathological narcissist of compassion
well what are the odds 899 999 no no
it's 8 million 999 999 to 1.
that's the statistical
that's the appropriate statistical
analysis for that claim so no I don't
think you have a trans child and a
pansexual child I think you are a
devouring narcissist and you are willing
to sacrifice your own children
to your narcissistic pretension to
evaluate your to it to what Elevate
yourself in the social hierarchy with no
work merely by claiming that you're that
loving that's you
God it's so awful it's it's almost
indescribable
and I think that's partly that there is
enormous pressures on mothers to be kind
and nice and to be
um ever nurturing ever compassionate
ever kind and the other that is the
archetypal mother the nurturer The
Protector but the other side of that is
is is
um pushing away
um um rejecting
um it's you can say it's the shadow side
but you know as young said if you don't
integrate the shadow side it'll come up
and bite you and actually if you know
you look at other mammals they bite
their young if they're trying to cat you
know get hold of the cheats and drink
milk with you know and they're and then
and the mother's annoyed and irritated
and pushes them away or even bites them
and we have to integrate that because
it's all it and and make allowances that
in ourselves that part of our job is is
nurturing and holding close but it's
also pushing away or allowing the child
to move away and sometimes that needs a
little push and that is fine right well
well the psychoanalyst said very wisely
I think this was Freud but it might have
been young he said the good mother
necessarily fails right so what you have
and this is very hard on women and I
understand this I really do I watch my
wife go through it my wife is actually
quite a disagreeable woman so she had
less trouble with this than a more
compassionate woman would have had this
is not a criticism of my wife by the way
so when a child is an infant so zero to
six months you should be a hundred
percent compassionate because the child
is immobile and completely helpless and
the rule there is whatever you feel is
100 correct but then as the child starts
to become mobile maybe that kicks in you
know essentially around nine months
the mother has to do this terribly
difficult thing of starting to separate
herself from the developing infant and
there is actually there's a real
sacrifice in that and there there really
is
the I would say the integration of the
Shadow side in that now the proper way
to handle that
the mature way to handle that is to
think something like this if you're
female to think look I did my time I I
sacrificed myself for this infant that
was entirely appropriate but I should
have a life of my own I should pursue my
own things I should pursue my
relationship with my husband I should
pursue my activities in the broader
world
I should facilitate my child's
Independence and I should model for that
child Independence
and that means that the appropriate
thing to do now is to move away from
that extraordinarily bonded mother
infant scenario to something that's more
detached and focused on autonomy and
competence rather than all compassionate
love and that's you know the freudians
and the unions were very very good at
delineating out the shadow side of the
devouring mother the best book on that I
think is the great mother by Eric
Neumann which is an absolutely terrific
book details out the symbolic
representations of the devouring mother
and the devouring mother interestingly
isn't the woman who pushes the baby away
or the the infant away let's say and
says you know go out and play the
devouring mother is the one that holds
the child far too tightly in her loving
Embrace and will never let go
so right that's the shadow side of that
hyper compassion and we're seeing that
you know that we might be seeing that
partly I've never said this I don't
think but
it's only been 50 years since women have
really been a force in the political
world
and we could assume that there's going
to be a feminine Psychopathology that
goes along with that just like there's a
masculine Psychopathology on the male
political side and you know the male
Psychopathology might be narcissistic
aggression something like that but the
female psycho pathology could easily be
devouring compassion easily and I do
think that's we're seeing that play out
in our culture now and God only knows
what the consequence of that'll be I
think that's what we're seeing in the
gender identity movement
um that as as women gain more power in
Academia in politics
um Etc you've got a combination of the
sort of narcissistic entitled male which
comes from the
generally middle-aged cross-dressers
that that you find in every organization
and Company and political party these
you know powerful man and on the other
hand you get this over emotional
illogical feeling based kind of support
and from the women because because this
movement is supported so much by young
women and so you get you you get the
worst of the feminine or the negative
side of the feminine and the and the
negative side of the masculine coming
together because I think conspiring yeah
yeah the marriage of the two I I I kind
of naively thought wouldn't it be great
if the world was run by equally men and
women because that would balance
the the you know the yin and the young
and I don't I don't believe that a world
weren't run by women would be more
Superior than a world run by men but
together but what if oh what if the
negative side of man and the negative
side of women come together and I think
that's what we're seeing
and on that note
I'm not happy no okay so for everyone
watching and listening I'm going to talk
to Stephanie and up for another half an
hour on the daily wire plus platform
we're going to talk a little bit about
how her interest in parenting and then
her interest in the broader social uh
what would you call ramifications of
attitudes towards parenting how all of
that developed and I do that generally
with my guests something more
biographical
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com